[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm William Henry.
And this is "Ascension Keepers."
After the genocide of
the Essenes in 68 AD,
the 1st to 4th centuries
AD saw the Essene ascension
teachings go underground
and reform as gnostic.
This religion was so
named because it depended
upon personal, spiritual
revelation, the gnosis
or knowledge of God.
Gnosis simply means knowledge,
especially of divine mysteries,
pointing to the mystical
desire of the gnostics
to expand their consciousness
beyond ordinary perception
and to see beyond the veil.
This enables access
to the divine realm.
And according to some
scholars, the mystical path
by which the gnostics
attained illumination
is mapped and teachable.
This means anyone can follow
this path, whereas in the past,
ascending to God's throne and
seeing his face was prohibited.
And in my humble opinion,
thanks to the Essenes,
now a shift had happened.
The gnostics, practicing
what they called Hekhalot
and Merkabah
teachings, now began
to emphasize the practice
of ascension and seeing God.
Through the choices one
makes in their life,
their spiritual practices,
mystical techniques,
personal deeds, and
inner awareness,
one can initiate an encounter
with an angel and journey
to heaven.
We can get on our boat and
voyage out of this world
to the Merkabah, the chamber
of God, the heaven of heavens,
said the gnostics.
In preparation for
this ascension,
the gnostics embarked on a
process of self-purification,
aimed at perfecting oneself
and gaining the higher
spiritual vibrations of
purity, holiness, wholeness,
and righteousness.
Practices like yoga, fast,
diets, cleansing rituals,
singing songs, chanting of
hymns, prayers, incantations,
and repeating the divine
name, active visualization,
meditation, were all used
to expand the perception
of the gnostic adept.
The effect of these
practices included
ecstatic trance, a
sense of the soul,
deep meditation, dream
vision, hallucination,
crossing into other
dimensions, and ultimately,
the dissolution of
the human into light.
All of the gnostic
spiritual practices
were aimed at
preparing the mystic
to enter the celestial chamber
of God, or the Merkabah throne,
in an encounter
with the Mighty One.
After passing through
seven heavens,
the mystic must penetrate
the seven resplendent palaces
of the seventh heaven
itself before arriving
at the throne of
glory, said Ezekiel.
And once there, the traveler
encounters God on his throne.
The visionary was taught
to expect God to be
wearing a garment of light.
The vision of it includes
a mystical experience
that transforms the body of
the visionary into light.
The gnostics believed
in a divine spark
in man, deriving from the
eternal divine realm, fallen
into this world
of matter and fate
and needing to be awakened
by a divine counterpart.
They upheld the serpent
of Eden as a Savior figure
who sought to provide humanity
with key knowledge to awaken.
As may be expected, the
traditional church fathers
saw gnosticism as an
anti-Christian heresy.
Simply put, however,
gnosticism is the earliest form
of Christianity.
The primitive Christiani,
the so-called heretics
who preceded the historic
Christians, were all gnostics.
It was Roman
Catholicism that labeled
them heretics in an effort to
consolidate its growing power.
In 1945, the gnostic
Gospels were discovered
in Nag Hammadi, Egypt.
These astonishing manuscripts
contained the secret teachings
of Jesus and the
earliest Christians.
Whereas orthodox
forms of Christianity
found their dogmas and
doctrines almost exclusively
upon the outer
teachings Jesus gave
during his brief earthly
life and mission,
gnostic Christianity
focuses primarily
upon the inner and
secret teachings Jesus
gave after the Resurrection.
That is, Jesus appears to the
disciples in his light body
form after his ascension.
And gnostics thought
of themselves
as the true interpreters
of these secret teachings
of Jesus.
The Nag Hammadi texts--
again, discovered
in Egypt in 1945--
are Coptic, meaning they are
Egyptian Christian examples
of these texts.
Until 1945, most of what
we know about the gnostics
came from they who
persecuted them.
The gnostics were
condemned as heretics
by the bishops of the
early Christian church
because they would not
accept the canon of the New
Testament or the apostolic
creed or the authority
of the new church.
But now, with the discovery
of the Nag Hammadi texts,
we learn who the gnostics
truly were in their own words.
Among several highly utilized
but previously unknown
gnostic texts was
the Gospel of Thomas,
which contained 114 sayings
attributed to Jesus.
Scholars believe it was
written during the second half
of the 1st century AD.
And it's claimed in
the Gospel of Thomas
that the sayings contained
within this gospel
contain the secret of salvation.
Saying one says, "Whoever
finds the interpretation
of the sayings will
not experience death."
The Gospel of Thomas
begins with the premise
that our individual
spirits once lived
in the awe, the spiritual
universe of divine beings.
Then, through some
primeval catastrophe,
the fall of humanity,
some human spirits
became imprisoned in flesh
and blood human bodies
and became trapped in
the material world,
unaware or blind to
their true source.
But Jesus comes
along and saves them
by revealing to them the
truth of who they are--
divine light beings who
belong to another world.
This realization frees them from
the garments of their material
bodies and puts them
on the way to acquiring
their robe of light.
The doctrine of
the soul's ascent
through the heavenly spheres was
a key teaching of gnosticism.
The ascension to
Heaven was equivalent
to a spiritual resurrection.
And in the fulfillment
of the Essene's mission,
Jesus cleared the way.
In the gnostic
ascension teachings,
strange beings called
Archons barred the way
to the seven heavens.
And some maintain the Archons
sought to take human souls.
But we don't worry about
them because the gnostics
had a remedy or a fix.
We could perfect
ourselves and put
on a garment of perfect light.
In the Gospel of Philip, a
second-century gnostic work,
transformation through
gnosis not only
allowed the ascent of
the soul, but it also
made us invisible
to the Archons, who
some believe are actually
extraterrestrial beings.
Phillips says that
"Not only will they
be unable to detain
the perfect man,
but the Archons will
not be able to see him,
for if they see him,
they will detain him.
There is no other way for a
person to acquire this quality
except by putting on the
perfect light and he,
too, becoming a perfect light."
The mysteries of exactly how
to become a perfect light being
formed the backbone of
the Essene revelation that
was adopted into the
gnostic religion,
especially a branch of
it called Manichaeism.
Most people may have never heard
of Manichaeism or its founder,
Mani, a Babylonian
prophet who has
been called the last gnostic.
However, this secret
society of gnostics
were fundamentally Christians.
Manichaeism fused early
Christianity and gnosticism
and spread from
Iran to Egypt, Iraq,
and throughout the Middle East.
This Chinese painting depicts
Jesus as a Manichean prophet.
The figure can be identified
as a representation of Christ
by the small gold cross
that sits on the red lotus
pedestal in his left hand.
This Chinese painting
depicts Manichean cosmogony
with the realm of
light at the top.
A number of Manichean
hymns are addressed
not to the historical Jesus,
called Jesus the Messiah,
but to the light messenger
Jesus, referred to as Jesus
the Splendor, a
magnificent, shining being
who displays the robe of light.
According to Manichaeism,
Jesus the Splendor
is sent to awaken Adam
and Eve to the source
of the spiritual light trapped
within their physical bodies.
And the aim of the
Manicheans was the attainment
of the light body, which they
called the beaming garment.
This immaterial or
flashing light body
beamed, meaning it radiated
or displayed bursts of light.
It came from a light garment
that once belonged to Adam,
believed the Manicheans.
It was also
instrumental in allowing
Jesus to be instantaneously
transported, or beamed,
through the wormhole,
or stargate, linking
the world of spirit
and the material world.
Today's imagination is filled
with militaristic views
of stargate travel, where
transport is affected
by advanced technology.
And every day we find we live
in a bigger and bigger universe.
We find more and more planets
every day in new galaxies.
New theories on how the universe
began come out all the time.
Theories on physics
are changing.
You have M-theory,
string theory.
Multiple dimensions are debated
and verified by scientists.
And our sun is even now thought
to be a wormhole or a gateway
to heaven.
Subatomic particles have now
been measured going faster
than light, which was
thought to be impossible,
opening the way for time travel,
or faster-than-light travel.
In this modern
context, the revelation
of the existence
of a secret race
or tribe of
transformed humans that
have followed the way of life,
the Essene way of perfection,
and achieved the beaming
garment should not surprise us,
nor should we be
surprised at how
advanced these beings could be.
A study by Eric Davis for
the US Air Force Research
Laboratory of speculative
teleportation technologies
showed that, to dematerialize
a human body by heating it up
to a million times the
temperature of the core
of the sun so that the
quarks lose their binding
and become massless and can be
beamed at the speed of light
in the closest physics
equivalent to the Star Trek
teleportation or
beaming scenario,
would require the equivalent
of 330 megatons of energy.
And he says that to meet
the information storage
and transmission
requirements would
require concurrent
computing capabilities
to continue to improve by
a factor of 10 to 100 times
per decade for 200 to 300 years.
This gives us an idea
of just how advanced
were the ancient perfect avatars
who put on the beaming garment
and beamed through the wormhole
through spiritual rather
than technological means.
The gnostics believed
that they who
wear the light body, the light
body garment, the beaming
garment, constitute a separate
race of advanced humanity
composed of awakened
and enlightened souls
from many time periods and
geographical locations,
including our own, and one
can only hope, including us.
So let's continue
exploring the life of Mani,
as there is much
to learn about him.
Mani was born in
Persia in April 216 AD.
In this depiction of
him here, we clearly
see that he is believed to have
manifested the rainbow light
body.
Mani's father joined
the Elkesaites
a white-robed Gnostic sect
that appeared around 100 AD
in Syria.
The Elkesaites were
founded by Christians
who believed their baptisms
connected them with Elkhasai,
meaning the hidden
power of God that
originated with the Essenes.
The Elkesaites
may have also been
called Katharoi, which literally
means the pure ones in Greek.
This may be the
earliest use of the word
Cathar, the mysterious
French Gnostic group
we will discuss later.
And as we will see, they
too were followers of Mani.
At the age of 24, Mani
traveled to India,
following in the footsteps
of the apostle Thomas,
one of the Twelve Apostles,
and for whom we just
discussed his Gospel of Thomas.
He was most certainly familiar
with the story of Thomas,
also told in the
Gospel of John, most
famous in the passage
of John 20 through 24
through 29, where
the Saint doubts
the Resurrection of Christ,
saying, unless I see the nail
marks in his hands and put my
finger where the nails were
and put my hand into his
side, I will not believe in.
Jesus is in his light
body form, and Thomas
has to experience it himself
in order to believe this.
So then Jesus comes
to Thomas a week later
and invites Thomas
to do just that.
After Thomas incredulously
poked the Lord's wounds,
he believed in the Resurrection
and the light body.
Thomas also missed the
ascension or assumption
of the Virgin Mary.
But she appeared to him as an
apparition, as a light being,
and transmitted to him
her holy robe or girdle.
Mani surely must
have contemplated
the ascension mysteries
enfolded within these stories.
And after his time in
India, Mani settled in Iran
and began assembling
a community of adepts.
As I said the, gnostics
were called heretics
because they did not
subscribe to the church's
historical version
of the earthly life
and death of Jesus.
The gnostics believed
instead that Jesus
was an instrument of
divine power, referred
to as the cosmic Christ.
And Mani learned from the
Elkesaites, his father's tribe,
if you will, that Jesus was a
reincarnating prophet called
the Illuminator.
Some of them saw Jesus, in
fact, as a reincarnation
of Zarathrustra or Zoroaster,
the Iranian spiritual adept
who taught self realization
somewhere between 2000 and 700
BC.
Zoroaster's ministry began when
he experienced a revelation
at age 30.
While sitting on
the riverbank, he
saw a shining being, who
revealed himself as Vohu Manah,
meaning good purpose,
and taught him
about Ahura Mazda,
the wise spirit,
and five other radiant
figures called Kumaras.
Now, this is very interesting,
as Kumara was also
a term or title
applied to Melchizedek.
Ahura Mazda is portrayed
riding in a winged ring called
the Faravahar.
In present-day
Zoroastrianism, the Faravahar
is said to be a reminder
of one's purpose
or mission in life, which
is to live in such a way
that the soul progresses
towards Frashokereti,
or perfect union
with Ahura Mazda.
Mani was also believed
to be the reincarnation
of Lao Tzu, the Taoist master
and ascension keeper who
lived around 500 BC, during
the time when the ascension
teachings were in
full flow in Babylon.
In this life, he would
become the Buddha of Light.
It was Lao Tzu who taught the
practice of heavenly ascension.
And Taoists believe the ability
to ascend to heaven, ideally
in broad daylight, accompanied
by one's household,
demonstrated one's achievement
of the most exalted state
of transcendence and shen.
Shen is very close to
saiyon and essen, or Essene.
It's actually a Chinese word
for an enlightened person,
translatable in
English as spiritually
immortal, transcendent,
superhuman, celestial being.
Wow.
Obviously, Lao Tzu is
another ascension keeper.
And we can further connect
him to the Essenes,
not just by the phonetic
similarity of his title, shen
and essen.
The oldest recorded shen
character has a rise up ascend
phonetic, supposedly
because immortals
could ascend into the heavens.
According to the digital
dictionary of Buddhism,
Chinese shen can also mean
Sanskrit rishi, an inspired
sage in the Vedas.
Remember, the Essenes taught
the secrets of Raz, or the veil.
And as we have seen, Raz
is also rooted in rishi.
So here is another important
tie-in between the Essenes
and Lao Tzu.
The Essenes and Mani
would agree with Lao Tzu
when he described the
perfect man as one who
could ascend to the loftiest
height without fear,
enter water and not get wet, or
enter fire and not get burned.
In fact, Taoism's perfect
man governs his inner self
and embraces his destiny.
The wholeness and
completion, perfection,
that we seek to
attain is actually
a wholeness and a oneness
which we already have.
We simply need to get in touch
with that wavelength, taught
the Manicheans.
The takeaway here is
that in Taoist tradition,
Lao Tzu would reincarnate
among the non-Chinese people
in order to teach
ascension and to spread
universal enlightenment.
Mani was claimed to be the
latest incarnation of Lao
Tzu, the new illuminator.
And in one of his writings,
the Book of King Shapur,
Mani tells that
the apostles of God
have always been
here bringing wisdom.
Buddha was one of them.
So was Zoroaster.
So was Jesus.
Mani believed he was the latest
to receive the transmission
and join the company of all
these ascension keepers.
So this was early Christianity.
The Christ was a cosmic being,
the great celestial being
of the Essenes, who
reincarnated at different times
and even inhabited
the body of Jesus.
But by the fourth century,
orthodox or traditional
Christianity had forgotten
this or covered it up.
Mani's writings focus on
a meeting with an angel
and a column of glory.
And every Manichean
expected to meet
an angel clad in a white
robe at the moment of death.
The wise guide would then
take us into the afterlife.
Mani claimed to have met his
angel while still living.
He not only met this being,
but Mani merged with him,
or became one, with
this holy entity.
Mani referred to this angel as
his light self, or his twin.
And from the moment he met this
twin, Mani was no longer human.
He bridged the worlds.
He was an apostle of
light, a perfected one.
In the Mani-Codex, Mani tells
how the angel came to him
like a flash of lightning.
It was sent by
the great fathers,
it said, and came to reveal
great secrets and hidden things
to Mani so that he could
reveal them to the world.
This is when Mani became
an ascension keeper.
Above all, the angel of
light sought for Mani
to communicate secrets about
the greatness of humanity
and our potential
for transformation.
The greatness of
man is not visible,
he said, but lies in secret.
Because of this, he is
lord over the beasts, which
are stronger and
greater than he,
by the standard of the
visible and the hidden.
This is also written in
the Gospel of Philip.
The angel of light
told Mani that we
are lost sparks
of divinity, lost
and wandering in an alien world.
And until we awaken
our light self,
we cannot know our
true greatness.
But our true nature,
our true self,
is a cosmic being clothed
with the elements,
as with a garment.
It is a being of light,
and it still exists.
Our goal is to activate
our angelic light self
and to be transformed
by this experience.
We do this by gaining
knowledge of our true nature.
And our light self will
then take over from there.
As with many gnostic
traditions, the Manicheans
taught that we do not seek
our angelic light self solely
for our own benefit.
We seek it as a way to
heal all, to resurrect all.
Men and women were among the
elect, as they were called,
who took on the task of
bringing in the light.
Mani implored us
to be constantly
aware of our cosmic
situation, that we
are light beings from
a divine realm who
have fallen into matter, and
that what we do in this realm
matters, because they believed
that if we make ourselves
slaves to Earth life
and all its pleasures,
we're sacrificing our true self.
For this reason, they
saw earthly things
as a means to an end, rather
than the end goal itself.
Mani's ideas about
ascension show
that he knew various works
from the gnostic tradition,
especially the Apocryphon,
or Secret Book of John.
Written around 180 AD
and found in the library
at Nag Hammadi, Egypt,
the Secret Book of John
is a collection of
secret teachings.
It was referred to by Irenaeus,
an early official church
father, as heretical
and was lost until 1945.
It describes the resurrected
and ascended Jesus
appearing and giving secret
knowledge, or gnosis,
to the apostle John.
The author describes
this having occurred
after Jesus "has gone back to
the place from which he came."
This book is reputed to
bear this revelation.
The author John is
immediately specified
as John, the brother of James,
who are the sons of Zebedee.
Many Christians in
the second century
hoped to receive a transcendent
personal revelation,
such as Paul was able to report
to the church at Corinth,
or that John experienced on the
Isle of Patmos, which inspired
his Book of Revelation.
As the Book of
Acts narrates what
happened after the time
Jesus ascended to heaven,
so the Apocryphon of John
begins at the same point
but relates how Christ
appeared to John.
The remainder of the book is
a vision of spiritual realms
and of the prior history
of spiritual humanity.
This text represents the
gnostics' highest desire
to encounter the beaming Jesus.
And in the Apocryphon
of John narrative,
John was at the
temple in Jerusalem
when he's confronted by a
Pharisee named Arimanius.
Like his brethren, Arimanius was
skeptical of John the Baptist
and his cousin, Jesus.
He wants to know,
where is Jesus?
And John tells him that
after his Resurrection,
Jesus has returned.
He's ascended to the
place from which he came.
He has ascended.
Arimanius responds by
accusing Jesus of misleading,
lying, and turning John and
others away from the ancestral
traditions.
Ascension, to these guys,
is heretical, remember.
The encounter spins John into
a whirlwind of questions.
He leaves the Temple of
Solomon and soon finds himself
in deep contemplation
on a mountaintop.
Who was Jesus, anyway?
And what was Jesus?
These questions
swirl in his mind.
Why was he here?
And who sent him?
And where did he go?
And what did he mean by all
this talk about eternal life?
All John learned from
Jesus is that he came
from the imperishable realm.
While John was contemplating
these questions,
suddenly, the heavens opened.
And the whole of creation
shone with a light from above.
And the world quaked.
A being appeared in the light.
At first it looked
like a small child.
Then it morphed
into an older man.
It morphed again,
becoming like a young man,
just like in the
Revelation of the Magi.
Then the being in the light
spoke to John, saying, John,
why doubt?
Why be afraid?
Don't you know this image?
Be not afraid.
I am with you always.
This phrase, I am
with you always,
is the last sentence
of Matthew 28:20,
spoken by the risen
Jesus to the disciples.
Then Jesus identifies himself
as the father, mother,
and the son, and also as
the incorruptible purity.
Then he tells John, "I have
come to teach you about what is
and what was and what will be."
In other words, Jesus
is going to tell him
about the past, the
present, and the future.
And Jesus does so
in order for John
to "understand," as Jesus
says, "the invisible world
and the world that is visible
and the immovable race
of perfect humanity."
Next, Jesus encourages
John to lift up his face,
listen, and understand
what he is saying,
and to proclaim it to
all your kindred spirits.
Those, says Jesus, who are
from the immovable race
of perfect human.
Jesus then tells John
that understanding
these concepts will be
difficult for those who are not
part of this perfected race.
And Christ mysteries belong
to this race, he says.
He also tells John he
encouraged Adam and Eve to eat
of the tree of knowledge
of good and evil.
Of course, the traditional
church assigns this role
to the serpent of Eden.
As we can see, the gnostics
had a different and even more
detailed version
of our ascension
than the traditional church.
More revelations about
the gnostics are to come.
And what we have learned here
is that, after the Essene
revelation, the Essene
mission continued.
This is what they hinted to
us in the Dead Sea Scrolls,
that while they might
have disappeared
from the scene
around 68 AD, they
were going to come
back again and again,
until the revelation
was complete
and the mission was complete.
My research reveals that Mani
was very much like you and I.
He was a researcher.
He got out of the
box, and he looked
at the Egyptian, the
Iranian, the early Christian,
in any tradition that he
could find that related
to the concepts of ascension.
And he found a new way
to put it all together
and inspired a whole generation.
The gnostics picked
up on this revelation
and continue to run with
it, assuring humanity
that our transformation
was underway,
and that it was only a matter
of time before all of us
would be able to fully embrace
these teachings and once
and for all unite
heaven and earth.
[MUSIC PLAYING]